Assetic
=======

If you're building an application that relies on a number of CSS or JavaScript
files, then you'll probably love Assetic. It's a third-party library that
integrates well with Symfony and to learn what it does, let's see it in action.

Using the stylesheets tag
-------------------------

Replace the 3 ``link`` tags we just added with a Twig ``stylesheets`` tag:

.. code-block:: html+jinja

    {# app/Resources/views/base.html.twig #}
    {# ... #}
    
    {% block stylesheets %}
        {# link tag for bootstrap... #}

        {% stylesheets
            'bundles/event/css/event.css'
            'bundles/event/css/events.css'
            'bundles/event/css/main.css'
            filter='cssrewrite'
        %}
            <link rel="stylesheet" href="{{ asset_url }}" />
        {% endstylesheets %}
    {% endblock %}

This tag allows us to list each CSS file we need and even a "filter", which
we'll learn about in a second. Instead of 3 ``link`` tags, we just write 1,
which assetic will use to render each CSS file.

Refresh the page and view the source:

.. code-block:: html

    <link rel="stylesheet" href="/app_dev.php/css/8e49901_event_1.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="/app_dev.php/css/8e49901_events_2.css" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="/app_dev.php/css/8e49901_main_3.css" />    

Things look similar to before, except that the paths to each CSS file have
changed. What's strange is that the files don't actually exist in our project.
When we request these files, they actually hit our Symfony application where
Assetic processes them and renders the correct CSS code.

.. tip::

    The URL ``/app_dev.php/css/8e49901_event_1.css`` hits an internal Symfony
    route and controller (provided by Assetic), which dynamically returns
    the CSS content for that file.

By running ``router:debug``, you can see that Assetic has added some routes
to support this. This all happens automatically, just by adding the ``stylesheets``
tag in our base template. This means that if we make a change to one of our
original CSS files and refresh it updates automatically with the changes.

The cssrewrite filter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now, let's look at what the ``cssrewrite`` filter is doing. Open up the generated
``event.css`` file in your browser as well as the original one in your editor.
In the original file, we're referencing our images using a relative path.
In the generated version, it's also relative, but the path has changed:

.. code-block:: text

    The original event.css:
    
        background: url(../images/pinpoint.png) no-repeat -5px -7px;

    The event.css that's served in (generated for) the browser:

        background: url(../../bundles/event/images/pinpoint.png) no-repeat -5px -7px;

But why? Remember that the generated version of the file is not in the same
directory as the original. This means that if the generated file tried to
use the same relative path, the path to the image would be broken. The ``cssrewrite``
filter fixes this by modifying these so that they still work.

Combining Assets into a single File
-----------------------------------

So far, we've used assetic to handle our CSS files, but we haven't really
seen a real benefit from it. To see the first great thing about assetic,
clear your cache, run a command called ``assetic:dump``, and refresh in the
``prod`` environment:

.. code-block:: bash

    php app/console cache:clear --env=prod
    php app/console assetic:dump --env=prod

When we view the source, we only have 1 CSS file:

.. code-block:: html

    <link rel="stylesheet" href="/css/8e49901.css?v=1" />

Open it up to see that Assetic has automatically combined all of our CSS into
a single file. And the less files we make the user download, the faster the
experience!

But unlike the ``dev`` environment where the files are dynamically generated,
the compiled CSS is a real physical file inside our project. Delete the file
and refresh. The broken-looking page proves that the CSS file isn't dynamically
generated by Symfony. That's important for production, since dynamically generating
the file would be pretty darn slow.

.. note::

    In the ``dev`` environment, the assets aren't real files, they're dynamically
    rendered via Symfony. But in the ``prod`` environment, Assetic points
    to real physical files and it's your responsibility to "dump" those assets
    (``assetic:dump``).

Instead, when we deploy our application, we'll ask assetic to compile and
create all the files that we need. To do this, run the ``assetic:dump`` command
and pass it the same environment argument that we use in the ``cache:clear``
command:

.. code-block:: bash

    php app/console assetic:dump --env=prod

When we refresh, the page is back to normal.

To control the name of the generated file, add an ``output`` option to the
``stylesheets`` tag:

.. code-block:: html+jinja

    {# app/Resources/views/base.html.twig #}
    {# ... #}
    
    {% stylesheets
        'bundles/event/css/event.css'
        'bundles/event/css/events.css'
        'bundles/event/css/main.css'
        filter='cssrewrite'
        output='css/generated/layout.css'
    %}
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="{{ asset_url }}" />
    {% endstylesheets %}

Without this, Assetic generates a unique, but obscure filename in the ``web/css``
directory. Clear your cache and refresh the page to see the new file location.
Since Assetic files are generated files, we don't want to commit them to our
repository. I like to follow a standard where I set the ``output`` for all
of my Assetic files to be in either the ``css/generated`` or ``js/generated``
directories. Add both of these directories to your ``.gitignore`` file to
prevent them from being committed:

.. code-block:: text

    # .gitignore
    # ...
    
    /web/css/generated/*
    /web/js/generated/*

Applying a Minification Filter
------------------------------

One of the biggest benefits of using Assetic is that your final CSS and JS
files are compiled into a single file. But another major benefit is "filters".
Like we saw earlier with ``cssrewrite``, filters allow you to process your
CSS or JavaScript files in some way. This can be really useful if you're
using something like LESS, SASS or CoffeeScript for your CSS or JS files.
Another really cool thing to do is to minify your CSS or JS files so that
they're smaller.

.. note::

    We'll use the cssmin library, but assetic also has support for `UglifyJs`_:
    and other libraries.

Let's try it! Download the `cssmin library`_ into the ``vendor`` directory of
your project. Usually we use the ``composer.json`` file to get stuff into
our vendor directory, but since this project isn't available on packagist,
we'll just download it and add it to our repository. This isn't an ideal way
to handle vendor code, but it's good enough for such a small library.

.. tip::

    Download the ``cssmin-vX.X.X.php`` file into a new ``vendor/cssmin`` directory
    in your project. You can forcefully add the file to git (even though
    the ``vendor/`` directory is ignored) by force-adding:
    
    .. code-block:: bash
    
        git add vendor/cssmin -f

Next, configure the filter in ``app/config/config.yml``:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # app/config/config.yml
    # ...
    
    assetic:
        # ...
        filters:
            cssrewrite: ~
            cssmin:
                file: %kernel.root_dir%/../vendor/cssmin/cssmin-v3.0.1.php

Assetic comes ready to work with a bunch of filters, including ``cssmin``.
With this configuration, the ``cssmin`` filter is *ready* to work. But to
actually use it, add the ``filter`` to our ``stylesheets`` block:

.. code-block:: html+jinja

    {# app/Resources/views/base.html.twig #}
    {# ... #}
    
    {% stylesheets
        'bundles/event/css/event.css'
        'bundles/event/css/events.css'
        'bundles/event/css/main.css'
        filter='cssrewrite'
        filter='cssmin'
        output='css/generated/layout.css'
    %}
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="{{ asset_url }}" />
    {% endstylesheets %}

Refresh the page in the ``dev`` environment and check out the result. Great!
The css files are being minified.

Applying a Filter only "non-debug" Mode
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The only problem is that having minified CSS when we're developing makes
it much tougher to debug and fix styling issues. To fix this, add a ``?``
before the filter name:

.. code-block:: html+jinja

    {# app/Resources/views/base.html.twig #}
    {# ... #}
    
    {% stylesheets
        'bundles/event/css/event.css'
        'bundles/event/css/events.css'
        'bundles/event/css/main.css'
        filter='cssrewrite'
        filter='?cssmin'
        output='css/generated/layout.css'
    %}
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="{{ asset_url }}" />
    {% endstylesheets %}

This tells Assetic to *only* apply this filter when we're *not* in debug
mode. Basically, this means that the filter will only be applied in the ``prod``
environment. We can develop with normal CSS files but deploy minified versions.

Applying Filters based on File Extension
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Head back to the ``config.yml`` file and add an ``apply_to`` option under
the ``cssrewrite`` filter:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # app/config/config.yml
    # ...
    
    assetic:
        # ...
        filters:
            cssrewrite:
                apply_to: \.css$
            cssmin:
                file: %kernel.root_dir%/../vendor/cssmin/cssmin-v3.0.1.php

Normally, adding a filter here means that it's ready to be used, but it's
not automatically applied to any of your CSS or JS files. But by adding the
``apply_to`` option, you're telling Assetic that this filter should be applied
to every file that assetic processes that matches this pattern. Remove the
``cssrewrite`` filter from ``base.html.twig`` and refresh the page:

.. code-block:: html+jinja

    {# app/Resources/views/base.html.twig #}
    {# ... #}
    
    {% stylesheets
        'bundles/event/css/event.css'
        'bundles/event/css/events.css'
        'bundles/event/css/main.css'
        filter='?cssmin'
        output='css/generated/layout.css'
    %}
        <link rel="stylesheet" href="{{ asset_url }}" />
    {% endstylesheets %}

The fact that the images still show up proves that the
``cssrewrite`` filter is being applied even without being mentioned in the
``stylesheets`` tag.

Assetic with JavaScript Files
-----------------------------

Of course Assetic can do all of this same magic with your JavaScript files
as well. Replace some of the ``script`` tags at the bottom of our layout with
a new ``javascripts`` tag:

.. code-block:: html+jinja

    {# app/Resources/views/base.html.twig #}
    {# ... #}
    
    {% block javascripts %}
        {# ... script tag for jQuery from a CDN #}
        
        {% javascripts
            'bundles/event/js/jquery.blockUI.js'
            output='js/generated/main.js'
        %}
            <script type="text/javascript" src="{{ asset_url }}"></script>
        {% endjavascripts %}
    {% endblock %}

This works exactly like the ``stylesheets`` tag. Notice that if you're using
some external CDN for something like jQuery, it can't be processed by Assetic.

And that's just about it! Assetic is a really great way to combine and add
filters to your CSS and JavaScript files. During development, your CSS and
JavaScript files are rendered individually and generated dynamically by Assetic.
In the ``prod`` environment, we run the ``assetic:dump`` task which creates
the actual compiled CSS and JS files.

Speeding up the dev Environment
-------------------------------

If you have a lot of CSS and JavaScript files, or if you're using some complex
filters, your pages might start to load slowly while developing. Since all
of the CSS and JavaScript files are being generated dynamically, this can
eventually be a lot of work. Fortunately, there's a great way to fix this.

First, head to ``config_dev.yml``, find the ``assetic`` configuration, and
set ``use_controller`` to false:

.. code-block:: yaml

    # app/config/config_dev.yml
    # ...

    assetic:
        use_controller: false

This tells Assetic to stop trying to generate our assets dynamically in the
dev environment.

When we refresh the page, things are ugly! The site still works, but the
CSS and JavaScript files are 404'ing: Assetic is no longer generating these
for us automatically. To fix this, we can run the ``assetic:dump`` command:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ php app/console assetic:dump

Because we're in the ``dev`` environment, we can skip the ``env`` option.
Not surprisingly, this dumps out all the CSS and JavaScript files we need.
When we refresh this time, everything should work again. If you have any
issues, clear out your cache directory and try again.

But the problem now is that each time we modify a CSS or JS file, we'd need
to re-run the dump task. That would be pretty bad for development. To fix
this, run the same ``assetic:dump`` task, but pass it two new options: ``watch``
and ``force``:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ php app/console assetic:dump --watch --force

The ``force`` tells the task to compile the files immediately and the ``watch``
tells it to run like a daemon. Instead of "finishing", it just sits there
and waits. I'll clear the screen and then update a CSS file to see it in
action. When we look back at the terminal, it's noticed that we modified a
file and re-dumped the assets automatically. This is *really* cool - it lets
us change our CSS and JS files and not worry about re-dumping the assets.
By the time we refresh the page, everything has already been updated. When
I develop, this is how I work with Assetic.

I do have one last word of advice. Under certain conditions - like when you're
adding new CSS files or moving a lot of things around, things might break
temporarily. It might be that you see an error in the ``assetic:dump`` task
or even a really strange ``assetic`` route not found error. If you get anything
weird like this, just re-dump your assets. If you still get it, clear your
cache and then dump again. This type of thing is pretty rare, but just watch
out for it!

Now that you've got Assetic up and running, you can experiment with more interesting
things, like using LESS or SASS for your CSS!

.. _`cssmin library`: http://code.google.com/p/cssmin/
.. _`UglifyJs`: http://bit.ly/sf2-uglify
